[MUSIC]
>> Douglas: So Act III,
function the ultimate.
You've been wondering when are we
gonna get to the good parts, right?
Because everything's been pretty
horrible up until now, right?
Hasn't this been kind of tragic?
So we're gonna get to some good parts and
the good parts in JavaScript
all wrap around the function.
Functions are really
powerful bits of stuff.
In other languages, you'll have methods,
classes, constructors, modules.
In JavaScript all you need is functions.
Functions are so powerful.
They can do the work of all
of those things and more.
They're just serving a universal stuff for
building things.
We make functions using the function
expression or function literal.
It would return a new function object,
which could then be invoked.
A function expression starts
with the word function.
It can then take an optional name,
which allows you to call
the function recursively.
It also allows for documenting
things like a code and stack traces.
You pass it parameters,
which are a set of names separated
by commas wrapped in parens.
And it takes a body,
which is a block wrapped in curly braces.
A function expression produces
an instance of a function object.
And every time that
expression gets evaluated
you'll get a new function object.
Function objects are first class,
which means they can be passed
as arguments to functions.
They can be returned from functions,
they may be assigned a variables, and
they may be stored in objects and arrays.
This is very different than in
languages where functions are sort of
the static things, which just kind
of exist before the program starts.
In JavaScript,
the functions run and add things to
the environment as they're compiled.
And because functions are objects they
inherit from function not prototype.
We use the var statement to declare and
initialize variables within functions.
You don't specify a type
in the var statement.
It can accept any type.
And variables declared anywhere
within a function are visible
everywhere within the function.
So we don't have block scope with the var
statement we only have function scope.
So, the var statement is does a really
weird thing, it gets split into two parts.
The declaration part gets hoisted to
the top of the function where the variable
gets initialized with undefined.
And the initialization part turns into
an ordinary assignment statement.
So here we've got var myVar = 0,
var myVar =
undefined gets hoisted to
the top of the function.
And at the sight of
the original statement,
we get an ordinary assignment statement,
which does initialization.
>> Douglas: To make
things more complicated,
JavaScript has a function statement or
a function declaration.
Which unfortunately looks exactly
like the function expression.
It starts with the word function in
this case the name is mandatory.
You can't leave it out.
It takes the same parameters and
takes the same body.
So it looks exactly like the other one.
The function statement is a shorthand for
a var statement with a function value.
So function foo expands into
var foo = function foo.
And that further expands because of
hoisting into var foo = undefined and
foo = function foo.
Both of these now get hoisted
to the top of the function.
>> Douglas: It's because of this
second hoisting that the language does
not allow you to declare
a function inside of an if.
Because the assignment of the function
variable is going to be pulled
out of the f and moved to the top,
so that's illegal.
Now it turns out most of the JavaScript
engines allow you to do it anyway.
But because the standard says you can't,
they all have different opinions
on what it actually means.
I don't recommend doing that.
>> Douglas: So it's really confusing
having both function expressions and
function statements,
which both look exactly the same.
So how do you tell them apart?
And it depends on where you are.
If the first token of a statement is
function, then it is a function statement.
If the word function occurs anyplace else,
it's a function declaration.
>> Douglas: So
we talked this morning about scope,
about block scope versus function scope.
And block scope is a very common thing,
function scope is a very unusual thing,
which is unique to
JavaScript's var statement.
>> Douglas: So and
function scope is sufficient,
but function scope looks like block scope.
Or at least the syntax is the same
as block scope languages and so
you get confusion.
So In some languages that have block
scope, you can do stupid things like this.
Where you can have two loops both
using the same variable name
as their induction variable.
And it works because in those languages,
each of these will be in a different
scope, and so
they won't interfere with each other.
It's extremely unwise but legal.
In JavaScript it is also illegal, but
it's worse than unwise because there's
only one i variable created here.
Both loops will be using
the same i variable.
And so they will interfere with
each other really badly and
this loop will never correctly perform.
>> Speaker 2: That's because
everything gets hoisted into the top.
>> Douglas: It's because both var
declarations gets hoisted to the top and
there's no check to see if a variable
has already been declared.
So if there is a second
var declaration for
the same name good, that's double good.
It should be an error, but
it's not, because it's not
an error can get into trouble.
So because of all of this weirdness I
recommend to clear all of your variables
at the top of the function.
Because that's where they're
actually being declared and
also declare all of your
functions before you call them.
All of this hoisting nonsense
was created specifically so
that you don't have to do that, that you
can call a function before it's declared.
But that requires that all this
hoisting weirdness be going on and
that you understand what
the hosting is doing.
And I think that's too much to expect
of the people reading your program.
So instead I think it's much better to say
declare the function before you call it.
That's a much easier thing to understand.
>> Speaker 2: But call, you're using the
word call where I would call it defining.
>> Douglas: In JavaScript,
you can lexically call a function
before you can clear it.
I can say
>> Speaker 2: I see what you mean.
>> Douglas: I can say foo parent, and
then below that I can say function foo.
>> Speaker 2: You don't mean to say var,
some function name, and
then later on to find a function.
I see, nevermind.
These two statements,
there's not this parallel between these
two statements that I'm looking for.
>> Speaker 2: So
functions aren't variables.
>> Douglas: No, functions are values
that can be stored in variables.
>> Speaker 2: Okay, if they have a name.
>> Douglas: Even anonymous functions
can be stored in variables.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.